Thank you, friends. Thank you. Always. Thanks for joining. As we know, we have like a fleeting
little shared time together. It's always so impermanent. And somehow we have the conditions
to come together to be here, to reflect on the living teachings of the Buddha right now.
So as we do that, to make ourselves kind of really receptive or kind of ripe or attuned
to the living Dharma, the living nature of reality. And there's always these three things
we do with our heart and our mind, these three motivations. So first, we turn on our joy
and appreciation, our gratitude, our renunciation mind, really bring up a sense of being grateful,
supported, nourished. I've really highlight the wonderful things we have going for ourselves.
And secondly, we bring up the idea that this path, this time, this reflection is not fundamentally
about me. It's about all beings. We try to really turn our mind with kind of genuine
kindness and concern for all beings. So we all want to be happy. Every single moment,
we're doing something to try to be happy. And no one wants to suffer. And so, like we're
going for refuge, we're bringing up this gratitude, we're really trying to connect to the Dharma
so that we can actually become enlightened and therefore like have the ability to really
help beings, to serve beings in skillful ways. So this bodhicitta, this heart mind of enlightenment
,
try to really turn that on. It's such a rare thing, a rare moment to actually try to intentionally
consciously turn on bodhicitta. I'm here breathing, thinking, reflecting right now so that I can
become enlightened so all beings will be free of suffering. And thirdly, generate a pure
perception. I know it can be hard to do. We're sometimes called sacred outlook, or the three
vajras, pure body, pure speech, pure mind. So temporarily, we're kind of like suspending
our disbelief and entertaining the possibility, actually with kind of like a little bit of
a delightful kind of like presence. Everything I see is actually the guru, is Padmasambhava.
Everything I hear is Padmasambhava. All the movements of my mind are Padmasambhava. Everything's
body of Guru Rinpoche. Everything's sound of Guru Rinpoche. Everything's wisdom mind of Guru Rinp
oche.
There's nothing that can happen that's not Guru Rinpoche. We boldly try to turn on that view. Pure
perception. Everything is sacred. It's all the wisdom mind, body, speech, Guru Padmasambhava.
You can turn that on with the great bodhicitta.
So the topic today is called surrender, mingling with the wisdom mind of the teacher. Surrender,
mingling with the wisdom mind of the teacher. So this in general is a topic of guru yoga.
This is a heart practice. This is the beating heart practice of all the highest teachings
of Buddhism. Zogchen, Mahamudra, all these teachings, these heart essence teachings taught
by the Buddha and Guru Rinpoche. Inseparable, it's always about the inseparable connection to the
guru, to the teacher. The wisdom mind of the teacher. All, I mean just anything I've come across,
all the teachings of Venerable Kambhramachas, there's always the heart, guru yoga, mingling
with the wisdom mind of the teacher. So this is the topic we're going to explore a little
bit today. Surrender, mingling with the wisdom mind of the teacher. Vajrayana is bold. It's
easy to say three vajras. It's easy to say everything's pure. It's all sacred. It's easy
until it's not. Every single thing that happens to us is the activity of Guru Padmasambhava.
That's a bold view. It's quite a bold view. So from the start off, the great master, just a couple
days ago, Zogchen Sirimachay is giving a live teaching. And he said, someone asked him about
Buddhism in India currently, how it's kind of a resurgence now. And he mentioned an interesting
idea that was really helpful for my mind. And he talked about shallow swimming pool Buddhism,
shallow swimming pool Buddhism. It's lovely if people get interested in Buddhism. Deliberative
teachings of the Buddha Shakyamuni. But if the introduction is like going into the shallow end
of a pool, we need that. It's safe, accessible, mindfulness. But it goes so deep. Buddhism goes
so deep. Everything is the wisdom activity of Guru Bhajay. This is so deep. Everything is the
Guru. Even on the Sutra level, everything's your mind. Chidamatra mind only is firmly established
that in Sutra level, Bodhisattva Yana, everything you experience is your mind. Vajrayana assumes
that as a base. So this is deep end of the pool Buddhism. This is the vast expanse of Vajrayana.
So this is where we're playing. Okay, this is Guru Yoga. This is Vajrayana. I'm assuming that. Okay
,
so that's where we get to play today. Because we're about to, we're practitioners, right? We're
doing
do some, do a Teresar Nundra practice. If we're not allowing our minds to entertain the possibility
that everything is the wisdom mind of the teacher, I don't know what we're doing in Nundra. I mean,
I'm not saying I can do that. But it's really clear. That's, that's like the ground of Nundra.
That's the view. So I'm just saying that's where we're opening. So as a, you know, setting the
table properly. This is a deep end. So why Guru Yoga? Why surrender? But I was specifically talking
,
I'm really the I'm assuming audiences more Vajrayana Tibetan Buddhist and practitioners,
people are really trying to transform their negative habits to reveal the wisdom within,
to see the wisdom without. So that's the assumed audience here. So why Guru Yoga? Three Vajras,
it's very practical. The idea of seeing three Vajras, all form, all sound, all space,
everything we could possibly experience is perfectly pure, 100% perfect. That is a very
big view is a very high view. So it's just practical. Instead of trying to swallow that
view or open that wide, because we have to stay open that wide, it has to be stabilized. In the
end, we have to get familiar with that kind of a view in Vajrayana. So a practical step before
that is to see a single person as having pure body, pure speech, pure mind, just one. And what
do we look for? We look for a qualified teacher. And there's a lot of teachings on what a qualified
teacher is. But this, and I'm not going to go over that now, maybe perhaps another time. But
qualified teacher, then all of a sudden we say, okay, maybe I can't, I'm not ready to really like
allow the kind of mega power that every single thing that happens to me, regardless of whether
I like it or not is the guru is the Dharma. Maybe I'm not ready for that. So just what about one
person? Everything they do is an expression of Dharma. Everything they say is the expression of
Dharma. Everything I think about them is a way to connect to the Dharma. This is so practical. So
this is one of the practical aspects of relating to a qualified teacher, someone who actually is
motivated by bodhicitta. And they see the Buddha nature within beings, and they see it within you,
they see it within me. And their main aim is to help bring out that Buddha nature, to help it
shine more brightly. And they don't enforce anything. We ask for their help. We ask them,
please help me. I'm so lost. I have so much suffering. But I also have a little glimmer
of confidence that this is not the end of the story. I'm not just some wandering, deluded,
horrible being. I think there's a glimmer of goodness there. There's actually maybe this Buddha
nature in me. And I can see it in you. So if we look for a check to see if someone's a qualified
teacher, there's a lot of indications that someone's a qualified teacher. If someone really
is shining out bodhicitta all the time, you'll see there's a lot of indications that their
bodhicitta is on. Because in the end, the simple thing in the end, you're around them, people are
around them. And people are more inspired towards the Dharma. People become more confident. People
become more loving, more kind, more courageous, less games, less fickle in the wind. Rimechit says,
not so sensitive. Oh, one day wind that way, one day wind this way. People become more kind
of anchored, rooted. And that this is an effect of being in the presence of these great wisdom
beings, these masters. There's a lot of outer indications of someone who's very stable in
bodhicitta. And here we're talking about a Vajra master, like a Vajrayana teacher. And we ask, we
look for them very carefully. And then when we kind of have confidence, and we've looked thoroughly
,
and we're kind of developing trust, and we're checking them, then at a certain point in the
Vajrayana view, we ask them, oh, will you be my teacher? Will you be my guru, my Vajrayana teacher?
We request it. And so they, you know, it's their bodhicitta. They're here to the endless end of
time and space. All they're interested in doing is serving beings, serving the teachings. But if
they accept us as a student, if we kind of fit the bill of a qualified student, there's a lot
of teachings about that too. But so if that meets a qualified teacher and a qualified student, then
we have this Vajrayana bond, a mutual commitment. Until all beings are enlightened, we are gonna
stay around. And I'm gonna, as a student, I'm gonna rely on your help, your guidance, and I'm
gonna try to follow it the best I can. And as a teacher, that person that Vajra master is promising
,
they'll stick it out too. Until I'm fully awake, until their student is fully awake, they will keep
showing up for them. This is like a basic Vajrayana bond, connection between a teacher and student.
So
this is such a sacred relationship. And it's just very practical. What are they helping us see? The
outer inner secret ultimate, or the three Vajras, body, speech, mind, space, sound, form, it's all
pure. It's all pure. All sentient beings have Buddha nature. And all the activities of sentient
beings is just a mandala. So we say this one being, their Buddha, and all the activities around
them,
their retinue, their close ones, more distant ones, their students, their objects, their home,
their activities, this is all just enlightened activity. And their mandala. This is a view we're
trying to hold. And we do that critically with logic. And we do that more relaxedly with like a
deeper logic, a more opened kind of post logic awareness, trying non conceptual wisdom, we're
trying to do both of these approaches. analytic analysis, also non conceptual wisdom. And we're
trying to constantly see this and return on this vision called pure perception. This is Vajrayana
view. This is all standard stuff, right? Standard radical stuff. Isn't it? Okay. So there's all
kinds
of textures in this conversation, because, okay, so we're asking, we're trying to see the guru as a
pure as Buddha. And we'll get into this the definition a little more thoroughly. Their Buddha. And
it's
tricky. So I have like a sampling of tricky, interesting nuance textures with this topic,
to like a little poke at a little bit and inquire and open up a little bit. So the first one is
everything is pure body, speech and pure, pure body, pure speech, pure mind, everything. We don't
get to play preference games, we don't have to, we don't get to have favorites with which part
of reality we're going to see as pure and which part we're not going to see as pure. In the end,
the big view is, it's all pure, everything is pure. So we can't play the game is all the outside
stuff. That's kind of fake. What's really real is in inside my mind. We can't play that game.
Outside's pure, inside's pure. It's all pure. It's outer, inner, secret, ultimate. All of it is
included, not just the part we like, or the part we're comfortable with, or the part we're most
talented with. In the end, we have to include it all. Because this is about the nature of reality,
of everything. So there's so many books. This is not just me talking about things. The Wish
Fulfilling Jewel. This is Guru Yoga text by His Holiness Dhu of Kensei Rinpoche,
in the long-changing tradition. Page eight. Guru Yoga, the union with the nature of the guru,
forms the foundation for all practices. There are many different techniques for its practice.
Within Guru Yoga, there are outer, inner, secret, and most secret methods. The text at hand
explains
the outer method, which briefly is to visualize the guru dwelling above our head, and to pray to
him ardently with fierce devotion. The inner method is to realize through the practice,
that our own body, speech, and mind are inseparable from the wisdom body, speech, and mind of the
guru. In the launch and ninctic cycle, the inner method is a Guru Rinpoche sadhana called Rigsan
Dupa, or gathering of the awareness holders. The secret method is to meditate upon the guru in his
Sambhogakaya form, the body of divine enjoyment, which in this cycle is the practice of Guru Rinp
oche
in the form of Chenrezig, and is called Dunya Rongral, or self-liberation of suffering.
The most secret method introduces us to the natural state of awareness,
and here involves the visualization of Kunchen Langchempa, with the primordial Buddha Samantabhadra
in his heart. This most secret sadhana is called the Tiklejalchen, or the sealed quintessence.
On the absolute level, the teacher is one with the very nature of our own mind,
which is itself the essence of Buddhahood, the tatagatagarbha. What then is the method
for realization of this absolute teacher? Through the outer, or relative, teacher and his pit
instructions, we can bring ourselves to the realization of the inner, or absolute, teacher,
which is awareness itself. The foundation, and thus the very basis for the accomplishment of
this realization, is the present guru yoga, which belongs to the outer method, and is classified
technically as a part of the preliminary practices. Since the actual heart of all the other stages
and
practices is precisely this guru yoga, one would be quite mistaken to think of it as just a
preliminary practice and, therefore, unimportant. Rather, we should realize that if we practice
this
guru yoga continuously throughout our entire life, then all the blessings of Guru Rinpoche himself
will easily enter our being. Essentially, the practice is to remember the guru in all our
activities, whether in meditation or in post-meditation periods. Thus, the actual sadhana
does not require that we remain within the boundaries of a retreat, and it is appropriate
for all occasions and circumstances, as well as for practitioners of all levels.
So here, the point I'm just kind of emphasizing is, like skillfully, we use an outer guru, the
outer
guru yoga, to, in the end, realize ultimate guru, the absolute guru, which is the wisdom mind of
ourselves. And the wisdom guru, the inner mind of ourselves, includes the secret and the inner
and the outer. It includes all of it. So it's not true to think the main thing is just the absolute
Guru Rinpoche, my mind. The secondary, less important thing, is the outer guru.
That's just, like, a means for me to recognize the real thing, because even in the middle way,
Madhyamaka, they don't have preference between relative and absolute truth anymore.
They're the same. Absolute is not more important than relative. Relative is not more important than
absolute. They're not separate like that. This is in Sutra Mahayana. We can't denigrate the outer
in favor of the inner. We can't forget the inner in favor of the outer. Full spectrum Buddhism.
This is deep end of the pool Buddhism. We have to include all of it, not just the favorite part.
If we don't like an outer part, we don't get to throw that away.
If we don't like an inner part, we don't get to throw that away. We're talking about pure nature
of everything. So that's a strong point for guru yoga, because if we just hold part of reality as
pure and the rest is impure, this is not Vajrayana at all, and it won't work. So that's a strong
point. And practically speaking, because I also really care about them making this try to be
practical, when we're dying, this is also a zung sargasar Rinpoche said, "When we're dying,
what's such an easy practice?" Guru yoga. Devotion.
When things get really hard in life, really, really challenging,
all the philosophical ideas and somersaults, they all stop. They become games. We get to see what
we've trained our mind in. How open is my heart now? When all of a sudden we can't control things.
We can't move our body. We can't say anything who's in the room or not. We don't have any control
over the outer environment. Even our own sense doors, they're failing. It's all getting kind of
like disturbed and uncontrolled. Then at that point, devotion becomes a much easier avenue to
recognize our wisdom mind through the avenue, like the skillful avenue of the outer teacher,
of Guru Rinpoche, of Buddha, of our own personal lineage teacher. This is very practical.
And this is like practical when we need help, when it's really challenging.
In this way, Guru yoga is very, very practical. We can practice it at any time,
in any circumstance, for all levels of practice. In fact, in Venerable Kemper Rinpoche's book,
The Nature of Mind, there's nine levels of zogchen practice. They go through each of the
methods, each of the views and each of the methods related to those nine levels of zogchen practice
.
The outermost level of zogchen practice is the Guru yoga that we do at the beginning of
every single practice. That's the outermost practice for zogchen. Visualize Guru Rinpoche
in the sky in front. Supplicate Guru Rinpoche. Receive the blessings of Guru Rinpoche. Mingle
your mind with Guru Rinpoche completely. That's the outermost approach of zogchen. This is
foundational. It's really foundational for zogchen, for these highest teachings,
the great completion teachings, great perfection teachings. And we have to, just the point,
it's very practical. And like actual mundane reality, when things aren't going our way,
this is a much more practical thing we can actually connect to. Philosophically, it's so subtle. It
's
so thorough, this Guru yoga. And so we kind of open this a little bit more. What is this devotion?
Have devotion when things are bad. When things are good, have devotion. What is this devotion?
Because Buddhism's not theistic. We're not worshiping anything.
I mean, it's just really, there's no Buddhism fundamentally saying there's not even a me here.
There's no you there. What is a devotion in the non-theistic context?
Kim Po-seung, Don Yung Rinpoche always mentions it, and he always demonstrates it so lovely.
A close, warm-hearted connection to the Dharma, to the lineage, to beings.
Like this deep, like Ninjae, this compassion for being so juicy. It's so tender.
We know we've been, those who've had the fortune to be around great masters like Kim Po-seung Rinp
oche,
Ken Chipotle and Cher Rinpoche, they're so, it's just so rich. Their kindness is so rich. It's like
squishy. It's so like ripe, you know, so kind, so just beautiful. They're so mingled with Dharma.
Close, warm-hearted connection to the Dharma. They have such a close reverence for the teacher,
like Kim Po-seung Rinpoche. His teacher is Holiness Duch Rinpoche, so close. He had many
teachers, but his Holiness Duch Rinpoche, he wrote his biography, Fearless Light of Indestructible
Wisdom. You read that biography, it's such a perfect example of what it means to be a qualified
student, how he wrote that book, how he saw his teacher. It's just so juicy. It has juice,
so alive, this warm-hearted connection. You feel like you're a part of it. The devotion,
it makes it sizzle, like Rinpoche says so much. It's like sizzling. The Dharma is like so ripe,
it's so happening. I'm a part of this, this lineage thing. It's not some gone,
ancient museum piece. This is it. We're in it now. This is living lineage. We're all going to be a
part of living lineage right now. Then how do we maintain this sizzling connection? The sense of
like, wow, I have this responsibility, this living lineage. I have this opportunity to become
enlightened
with this life, this very life. I could get out of cyclo samsara and actually be of tremendous
benefit for beings forever. This life, it could happen. For all the future generations, what I'm
doing now, what we're doing now with the Buddha Dharma, I don't want to mess this up. I don't want
to break anything. This system's worked for thousands of years. Countless beings have achieved
enlightenment from this system. What's the heart of this system? Guru yoga.
This is such a special opportunity we have to connect with the wisdom mind of a teacher.
Why? To connect with our own wisdom mind. See the wisdom minds of all beings. To have a real sacred
outlook of ourselves and others. We're a part of this living lineage. This is devotion.
Devotion is not you're good and I'm bad. You have power and I need help getting a new car.
Devotion is like this living, we're all in interdependence, all these connections with
each other. Close ones, near ones, middle ones, far ones, really far connections, but we're all
connected, interdependence. Devotion is really feeling a part of the field of connection
and lining ourselves up, attuning, aligning with more connection in a way that's going to be more
mutually boosting or anything I say, anything I think, anything I do, it's going to be
more supportive, like more nutrition. That ripple of energy, of cause, condition is going to merge
out and be more supportive, like nutrition or beneficial boosting supports for other beings
that come across that, that mind wave I created, that word I generated, that kind of movement,
these great masters, you can see they become so elegant.
They're so attuned, they're so aligning with the situations, the circumstances,
and we're asking them in Guru Yoga, like line up with me so that I realize my wisdom more quickly,
so that my compassion turns on more brightly, and all the things blocking it, just remove that,
help me remove that, show me how to remove that for myself. I can get myself out of the mud.
I can see that it's just a wisdom, it's just Guru Rinpoche happening all the time.
This is all mind, mind is emptiness, everything is mind, it's all pure, these are all big ideas.
We're asking with this connection in Guru Yoga to help us actually get really familiar with this,
we may get so intimate with these ideas that they become like our default mode,
they become just the water we're in. This is all Guru Rinpoche happening, three vajras,
pure perception, and the trick is with all this, is that there's some truths we don't want to see,
we just don't.
We can say everything's pure, but when we really open up everything,
there's a lot of everything we don't want to look at,
just for different reasons, but since we're like kind of in playing the space of Guru Yoga,
I opened this book, it's now becoming an old book,
the Vajrayana Seminary teachings of Vajradhara Shoryam Trumpermache,
Tantric Path of Indestructible Wakefulness, this book is amazing, this book is amazing.
Okay, here's where we go, Guru Yoga now, some truths we don't want to see, page 95,
anyone entering into the Vajrayana needs such a Vajramaster, it is said that you need a Vajramaster
who's like a crocodile, who only knows how to accept, once anybody enters into the crocodile's
mouth, it accepts rather than rejects, the crocodile never lets go, rejection is against
the principle of crocodile ship, and that quality of not letting go is also one of the Vajra
principles of the Vajramaster, you actually find that image in the iconography of the
Buddhist iconography, the five pointed Vajra scepter or the Dorje, the four outer prongs of
the Vajra arise out of the mouth of four crocodiles, the principle of Vajrayana is non-flinching,
you never let go, but you accept and hold on, that is Vajra nature, and the same thing applies to
the Vajramaster who's actually and literally the spokesperson of the Vajrayana teachings,
in fact the Vajramaster is the only spokesperson, even the books that present the Vajrayana
teachings cannot be regarded as independent from the Vajramaster, books can speak in some sense,
but books have to be worked with, interpreted and elucidated to be suitable for you,
I'm going to keep reading this because this is really important, the Vajramaster has two
expressions relative and ultimate, the relative expression is how the Vajramaster manifests
something according to Kunzop or the relative phenomenal world, sometimes Kunzop can fool you
a great deal and sometimes it can inspire you to see the flawlessness of the truth,
in order to deal with your apparent phenomenal world, to deal with your fascination of this
world of facade, you have an external guru, a Kunzop guru, this external guru or Vajramaster
of Kunzop actually exists outside of your body and mind, this guru is manifested externally,
the Kunzop guru shares the same roof, the same sky, the same floor and the same earth as you do,
the second type of guru, the ultimate guru or tundam appears from the memory or the example
of the external guru, from that you begin to have a sense of inner guru or inner guidance,
this is often subject to misunderstanding because the inner guru could be misinterpreted as a part
of your expectations, if you do not have a complete and proper relationship with a Kunzop guru,
you could misunderstand the inner guru according to your own wishful thinking,
I repeat that last line, if you do not have a complete and proper relationship with a Kunzop
guru, an outer guru, you could misunderstand the inner guru according to your own wishful thinking,
the guru of Kunzop is also called the guru of example or impression, when you have enough
impression of, sorry, when you have enough of an impression of the Kunzop guru imprinted on your
state of mind, then the guru of the ultimate reality within you can shine through, otherwise the
inner
guru could be regarded as just pure hoax, just your own expectations, that kind of inner guru
is much phonier than the real Kunzop guru who actually exists outside of your body physically
or geographically, continuing just a little bit longer, the way in which the Kunzop guru becomes
imprinted on your state of mind comes from something more than simply observing the guru
or just gazing at the guru, admiring him or her and hoping for the best somehow does not work,
the impression the guru makes on you is a question of how much communication takes place between
the
guru and you, it is a question of how much the actual message is getting into you, if we return
to the analogy of the guru being like a crocodile you could say that the impression of the teacher
that makes on you is the same as when the crocodile has swallowed you, digested you and
shat you out and afterward you still have teeth marks on your neck, as another analogy it is a
bit like relating to your dying father by having to put him in the coffin and put flowers around
his corpse rather than just watching the ceremony, you take part in the funeral service for your
dead
father and it makes an impression on you, you have a sense of reality, in talking about the Kunzop
guru we're talking about a living guru, the guru is sending particular messages to you and manifest
ing
their liveliness to you in all kinds of ways, the living power of the lineage is taking place
channeled through your guru, some of the guru's messages may be verbal while others are
communicated
in silence, it could be any form of communication but it has to be realistic rather than imaginary,
you cannot stretch the logic by thinking that since your guru gave you an apple this morning
you've attained some kind of fruition, the guru might give you an egg but that does not mean
you're in an embryonic state, the communication is more sophisticated than that, the guru is aware
of your intelligence and any communication has to work within that individual intelligence.
So we have to really actually be vulnerable
when it says mingling with the wisdom mind of the teacher in guru yoga this is not at a distance,
this has to be like felt and we have to be moved, we have to be moved by this connection,
we have to let it shape us, we have to be exposed,
we have to be exposed, there's truth we need to see, if we don't see certain truths
we'll never deal with them, there'll be parts of reality we just don't go, we just like leave in
the corner, I'm not saying we need to see all the truth at once because then most of us will just
explode, I would explode definitely but little by little we have to we have to become more
receptive, more vulnerable to actually having the dharma mingle with us to change ourselves
and I'm just saying what is the wisdom mind the wisdom mind of a guru is not my idea of it.
I can't possibly know the wisdom mind of a guru, I don't have wisdom mind like that,
I don't know what it's like to be an omniscient or beyond the boomies,
it's way it's beyond my current blind spots, so I'm relying on someone who's not doesn't
have those blind spots who sees a way around that corner and they're helping me see what I don't
see
yet, they're pointing out something I can't see that's there right in front of me, it's like a
piece of your nose when you close one eye there's always a piece of your nose there, you close
another eye there's a piece of your nose, there's always you're always looking at your nose and in
your view but it we blend it out our mind just overlooks it every single moment like I don't see
my nose but it's actually you close one eye there's a piece of your nose there we constantly like
not
seeing these things that are right in front of us literally we need someone to help point that out
to us who we can trust and rely on so this is a big topic so quite a big topic and I thought to
open up certain things because it's also the heart essence of Adriana and we're doing it all the
time
this is the this is the the practice of zogchen but if we do it in a way we have to let it make
us tender you have to let us make make us kind of juicy and cozy and that can be very raw like very
uncontrolled very exposed when we see the parts of ourselves and the world we don't want to see yet
and then we need supportive circumstances to actually be able to see these things too
we're not kind of being silly and just like showing ourselves the blatant truth we're not
taking some giant heroic dose of mushrooms and just show me reality you know because for the
most part that happens and a lot of people don't come back together they get ripped open
then they have to do physical therapy mental therapy the whole rest of their life to
at that this is too much too fast too soon we're trying to be a little more delicate and a little
more kind of masterful than that it's not Adriana and bodhisattva yana hero hero heroine ship
it's not one time in a battle we're not like i'm a hero if i go in the battlefield and do it once
this is i have to keep showing up every single moment for all beings that's the kind of hero
her here warriorship talked about in the bodhisattva yana every moment i'm at serving beings
forever this is such a courageous view vadriana view just makes this more approachable honestly
because it doesn't say there's these impure stuff that we need to remove
it says look at that stuff a little more closely it's actually wisdom
look at the emotions a little more closely their source is actually wisdom before we twist it
it's actually wisdom this is such a heroic view to not throw anything out how non-violent this
is such a non-violent view there's no garbage to remove there's nothing to fix there's nothing i
have to judge and fix someone else's thing either it's all pure this is a very very bold view
but we need the support of circumstances for this view which is an immense view
and it really is destabilizing and dismantling this view because in the end i want to this
quotes good devotion that closeness that warm heartedness this is not any way a sense of servitude
it's not some small view of right and wrong up and down good and bad your special i'm not
this is the guru drinks bourbon looks like cancer image page
194 it may sound as if you have devotion first in order to have an understanding of the view
the devotion ignites the practice of the dharma but as you become more seasoned in practicing
the dharma especially the vadriana the gap between devotion and the goal of the devotion
becomes very small as you become more skilled in practicing you'll see that devotion is the
awareness of impermanence devotion is the renunciation mind devotion is compassion for
all beings devotion is none other than the experience of dependent arising most important
the moment there's devotion you have the view and there is the awareness of shunyatta
the great master took origin which he said the two principal points of vadriana are devotion
and compassion we have devotion to those above the awakened beings who are further much further
along than ourselves in compassion for ourselves and all beings like us and those suffering even
more these two devotion and compassion great jot something posted the same thing with these
two all the practices stay on track devotion and compassion there's these simple things we can do
to keep coming back as a simple practice devotion guryoga is so simple it's so elegant is not
really
there's it's very simple as like what we need to do in the practice is quite simple and it's
actually very practiceable in all the circumstances but we really do need to like ready ourselves
for
the immensity of seeing everything is pure so i'm kind of out of time but there's books like karma
chagme great master kedav karma chagme there's raga asai he said in his quintessence union
absorption and mahamudra is song seven there's four enhancements to any practice the first one
is guryoga second one is yidam practice the third one is tung lien and the fourth one is tricha and
togol but the first is guryoga when the practice is getting stale guryoga if you're interested in
learning more song seven union of mahamudra and zogchen again his only is duga kensa nirmuche
a hundred verses of advice it's teachings on the great master parampasanjay verse 98 sometimes you
may get discouraged your practice is not working and you worry that it will never become stable
nothing seems right and you ask yourself whether you might not make the swifter progress by
changing
to another practice during these moments of doubt and hesitation if a deep and yearning devotion
for
your teacher wells up from the depths of your heart the obstacles that are impending you will
dissolve and your practice will be invigorated unshakable faith and devotion act like a magnifying
glass that can concentrate the rays of the sun and easily kindle a heap of dried grass into a flame
real progress on the path comes from the blessings of the guru and these blessings are sparked by
your devotion most of the great teachers of the past attain realization through devotion to their
own gurus for example so great was the devotion of some of gumpopas disciples that they realized
the nature of mind simply by laying eyes on dagla gumpo mountain where he lived
just repeating these things this is devotion is the heart of this it's the way that most masters
in the lineage achieved accomplishment is devotion so we can't take this lightly
we really have to kind of open and look at this and then they say this
this is such an amazing book guide to the words of my perfect teacher
by kempo naong paozong then he was said to be emanation of vimalamitra the great master of
vimalamitra this is such a beautiful book it goes through words of my perfect teacher the the from
the ati yoga view yeah so this is in the sangha house this is now getting older 2004 so in the
ati yoga section of guru yoga it's talking about how we see our teacher in order so this is the
key thing in order for guru yoga to actually be a complete path how do we have to see our teacher
so this book goes into this quite a lot so quote 258
what is the most important thing here it is to pray to the teacher with such devotion that we
see him as a buddha if we do so the wisdom of realization will take birth in our minds
quote within six months of unwavering devotion you will reach the level of vajradhara
also quote through devotion to the teacher even the graded levels and paths are accomplished
within months or years so we must see the teacher as buddha how in the pratimosa tradition whether
or not the teacher is a sublime shravaka or pratyaka buddha it is sufficient to see him as
an ordinary person with good qualities in the bodhisattva tradition it is enough to see the
teacher as someone with bodhisattva qualities whether he is on one of the sublime bodhisattva
levels or a nirvana kaya buddha or simply someone on the greater path of accumulating
in the tradition of the great perfection seeing one's teacher as an ordinary pandit a sublime
arhat a sublime bodhisattva a nirvana kaya buddha or even a sambhoga kaya buddha will not do
you have to see him as the dharmakaya buddha if you're able to do so and pray to him thus
with unwavering devotion the wisdom of realization can arise in you in your mind
without your having to rely on any other factor as a path this manner of realization has been
borne out in many cases in the noble land of india those of naropa nagabodhi and master gandapa
and in tibet those of sampo lapel the great omniscient langchampa the vijadara jingme lingpa
and others in order to see the teacher as buddha there are five things you should know one that he
is a buddha two that everything he does is the activity of a buddha three that for us he's even
kinder than all of the buddhas four that his immensely kind that that this immensely kind
teacher is the embodiment of all the refuges and five that if you pray to him with all of this in
mind the wisdom of realization will take birth in your being without your having to depend on
any other factors as a path and then the next several pages go over these five ways that we
need to know about our teacher being a dharmakaya buddha so this is like standard zogchen like for
guriyoga to work in zogchen we have to see the teacher as a dharmakaya buddha so that is the
statement made by ken kenpo naum pelsang so this is all in patra rambhache's words of my perfect
teacher he's just unpacking more subtle layers of the meaning so yeah then there's a lot of ways to
like make this like really light too and then i'll wrap up
this in the presence of masters this is a compilation of quotes of buddhist masters
from the three yanas foundation of buddhism mahayana bhajriyana and it goes all just
quotations from different masters and so i looked in there and there's different one of the
quotations
by his son's duo kensarimbejai again page 172 on metaphors of the guru the teacher is like a great
ship carrying us on the perilous ocean of existence an unerring navigator guiding us to the dry
land
of liberation a rain of nectar extinguishing the inferno of negative emotions and actions
a bright sun and moon dispelling the darkness of ignorance a firm earth patiently bearing the
weight
of both good and bad a wish granting tree bestowing both present and ultimate happiness
a treasury of vast and deep instructions a wish granting gem providing whatever beings need on
their path a father and mother loving all beings equally a great river of wide and swift compassion
a great mountain of joy rising above worldly concerns and unshaken by the winds of emotion
a great rain cloud raining down its benefits impartially everywhere uninfluenced by like or
dislike so how to see the teacher so there's just like okay so if we're supposed to see the teacher
as dharmakaya buddha then how like how do we warm up to that and then that's on us for study and
practice i mean really there's a lot of teachings and a lot of sangha we can kind of warm up but to
like get that sizzling devoted kind of juicy connection is the responsibility of practitioners
vadriana practitioners i'm talking about to have this be a fresh kind of living experience
this is kind of what we're trying to do but then in the end it becomes so simple
like matchy rickard and big end of his big memoir he's saying about his own path
345 notebooks of wondering month
he's talking about a retreat he was in more than any other form of practice
i engaged in guru yoga a union with the teacher's nature of ultimate enlightenment
a practice that has always been at the heart of my spiritual path
the union of your own mind with the teachers allows you to rediscover the primordial simplicity
of the nature of your mind in which you need only rest without hope and fear because he ends up
being so simple the union of your own mind with the teacher allows you to rediscover the primordial
simplicity of the nature of mind in which you need only rest without hope and fear
there's nothing to accomplish it's already done it's already pure then what a relief that's such
a big relief actually in the end this view but then we have to get kind of so cozy and familiar
with it that when all the kind of turbulence comes up this becomes a reliable way that we can
engage
with experience with life with ourselves with others and this is the path this is like badriana
path and we happen to already be in the crocodile mouths of teacher if we happen to have taken like
act you know asked requested teacher to be our vajra vajra master and padriana teacher
if we were to take empowerments then we're in this which is a big benefit it's like tremendous
benefit and at the same time there's all kinds of caveats
one this is by subni rubiche in the same presence of masters 182 of course we need to follow a
spiritual teacher and of course we need to receive instructions of course we need to put those
instructions into practice but if one spends one's whole life trying to follow spiritual teachers
something is also wrong there we need to supplicate our root guru in order to discover the indiv
isible
nature of his mind and our mind that is definitely necessary but it's not good to think quote if I
'm
not with my teacher I won't know how to practice if I'm not with my teacher I can't deal with
disturbing emotions if I'm not with my teacher I'm lost and I don't know what to do so this is
theistic buddhism we use the teacher to make an impression and then we have that impression that
memory there's habits there's good habits that kind of impression the guidance we've received
and we're trying to apply it in our life and rely on it but it doesn't mean we always have to be
right next to them we don't have to call and ask what color to paint the bathroom or something you
know I mean it's it's good if we really need the support sometimes that is the support we're in a
spot where like we're just like basically really fragile condition and that's the kind of support
we need but this is a dharmakaya buddha we're asking about pink or green
you know in the end the path is liberation of all beings not just worldly concerns
last thing
this is such a good quote from trunk vermice tantric path of indestructible wakefulness
great along with this understanding of sacred outlook it's very important for you to understand
that the world has three aspects the yidam's or principal deities the teacher or vajra master
and yourself combined that three-fold situation provides what is known as the vajra world
sacred outlook is not only about thinking that everything is good it is the absence of imprisonment
sacred outlook is not only about thinking that everything is good it is the absence of
imprisonment you begin to experience freedom that is intrinsically good almost unconditionally
free so the vajra world that you're entering is basically good unconditionally free fundamentally
glorious and splendid
that's called freedom it's all pure it's all vermice
so then this goes into okay two more things and then i'm actually will go into practice
this book is really amazing
okay i know ziger contra mache he really references i have some habit memory in my
mind of him saying this word so much this is on complete openness this is about how to relate to
the teacher okay surrender mingling with the wisdom mind of the teacher 113 having developed
devotion the next level is what is called is lotte lincure in tibetan lo lo te means trust
it refers to having a kind of trust that is a mixture of faith and devotion
and to having a firm commitment ling means completely and cure means abandoning or letting
go so lo te lincure means to trust completely and be willing to let go in other words once you
develop trust in the teacher and the teachings you do not check your insurance policy you may or
may
not have an insurance policy but in any case you let go of that with lo te lincure you're actually
trying to put your hand through your rib cage in order to take out your heart and hand it over to
your guru you hope that your guru will take care of your heart both for yourself and for your guru
and having taken out your heart you still survive beautifully it is an extremely personal
experience
surrendering to the guru is not necessarily confirmed by the teacher alone you also begin
to realize your own existence your own space your own situation by surrendering you become worthy
of
receiving further knowledge it is a pragmatic approach not particularly philosophical it is
an idea that comes through practice and then finally next after this openness or trust and
a willingness to like really let go of old habits goes into daringness 114
there's several factors that enable you to bring the teacher into your life
along with these factors such as faith and devotion you also need daringness
daringness is more tricky it is letting go of your own personal collection the things that you have
been holding on to for a long time you've built a stronghold within yourself a sand castle which
guards a sand castle with guards and weapons and communication systems so that nothing can ever
jeopardize your project of holding on to the survival of your ego so you might begin to panic
about whether you're willing to give in give up or more likely give out letting go of that whole
system is very daring even threatening in some cases but without making such a daring move to
accomplish egolessness any achievement of enlightenment is impossible that is actually
the definition of liberation being liberated from yourself it means that you're liberated
from arrogance panic and deep-rooted attachment so basically what we're talking about here is
that you have to tear open your heart you do not literally need to commit suppuku but
psychologically
is very close to that the possibility is there having given up having surrendered totally
thoroughly and properly you find yourself in a delightful situation what a relief
i got away from myself i managed to abandon myself in the process you might sweat you might
shake you might shudder stutter but it is a good stutter a good shake a good panic because you've
been released from that particular imprisonment you find yourself so meek you begin to feel
very humble therefore you can actually relate with the vajra master
at that point you begin to find there's no barrier between you and the teacher
you feel that finally your windows and doors have been opened so that at last you can experience
fresh air which is so refreshing so natural and so good you feel quite humble but at the same time
you feel so delighted at last you can smile without pretense and you can see your world
in a different light such possibilities always exist so this is the type of surrender being
pointed to in vatriana context to actually mingle with the wisdom mind of the teacher and we happen
to be we meaning students of venerable kenbermages we happen to be so fortunate and like how
amazing
they are by all accounts any way you look they're so extraordinary we are so fortunate and this so
this is like all these things are challenging to become so vulnerable and to do so gracefully
carefully kindly intelligently consciously not recklessly but to really delicately with a lot
of good intention bodhicitta to like actually like make this commitment to reveal my egoic
shortcomings so they can i can really blend and mingle with the wisdom mind of the teacher
dharmakaya buddha union of three kyas so i'm like we're so fortunate and there's great masters in
the world and this is a living lineage that we can fully rely on to achieve enlightenment
in such a short period of time for the benefit of all beings this is very possible there's been so
many masters in the lineage who've done it and now we get to try we're trying this is the years go
by
there's only like sands through the hourglass those are the days of our lives
this is going so like every moment counts this all matters in this vatriana view the power is like
these giant giant arctic shelves of egoic imprisonment we've frozen ourselves into for
so long we can just break off these huge cliffs of being stuck self-fixated in really short time
but it's going to shake us it will rattle us being that exposed that willing to be changed
is a very strong experience and that's the deep end of the pool buddhism this is vajrayana buddhism
i don't see any personally i don't see much benefit to giving the dharma light version
of tibetan buddhism vajrayana has been in the so-called west or like united states of america
now for quite some decades look at this stack of books this is all like in the last 10 years
there's thousands of them now there's so many teachers there's so many teachings that you can
i bet right this minute you can click a button on your computer and do five zoom calls of actual
teachers that are reliable and practice with them watch their videos it's so accessible
this is like kind of enough in one way enough kind of fooling around
it's up to each of us this guru yoga is so accessible it's so easy it brings all the
practices into one it's going to be very challenging but it can't get more simple than this
you can't make zogchen more simple than this
if you try to take out guru yoga from zogchen there's no zogchen if you try to take out an
actual living connection to an actual living teacher who's going to show the inner guru too
you say oh i don't need the outer guru because i have an inner guru
no one in vashriyana history has ever done that never happened why because they say it doesn't work
so it's a free country we're all welcome to do whatever we want because samsara us
can do it any way we want but we happen to have like authentic living lineage with completely
reliable vashriyana masters and like living all these teachings and practices so here we go
with dojum tersar nundra his holiness dojum rimpoche supreme head of ningma school like we're
right in the middle of so much rich vashriyana treasure so then we'll go to this dojum tersar
nundra practice connecting with wisdom mind of his holiness of our own personal teachers and
our own wisdom mind and really mingling them together thanks so much your kindness patience
thank you and then we'll go to dojum tersar nundra page 18 calling the lama from afar
thank you thank you all thank you a few concluding words brief
so this all comes down to bodhicitta and we're really honest with ourselves and we get it for
the great masters who've really studied this studied dharma great scholars great practitioners
they've come to see because they say it's all comes down to bodhicitta this is all about bodhicitta
the whole path all the different aspects of the path foundation of buddhism mahayana vashriyana
all bodhicitta heart mind of enlightenment and if we're honest with ourselves and when we
dare to look closely at our own minds i can see for myself i'm really not doing much with
bodhicitta most of the time just have to look and see that and change that's the path so in the
context of vashriyana then what does this mean and there's a quote from trunk vermice and i found
this very helpful because it's so true 101 the guru is the maker of all kinds of situations
in order to further a student's relationship with the dharma bodhicitta in order to further a
student's relationship with the dharma the guru creates situations and inspiration from a mundane
way of looking at this it is quite futile and needless to create such unnecessary hassles
but the guru does not hesitate to do so even though these hassles are seemingly bizarre
or unnecessary and interestingly those situations bring enormous insight to the student's mind
when we speak of the guru setting up a situation for the student it is not so much an actual
biological or physiological setup it is more of a psychological world that is the guru creates a
psychological situation in which you're paranoid or highly inspired or whatever it may be this has
nothing to do with your basic karma if you're born with a lot of bad karma for example the guru's
role is to include that in the situation and within that they then create further situations
which are basically psychological so the guru's actions are a kind of play the guru helps you to
see things clearly but before you can see things clearly you might need to experience some kind of
confusion you might need some things to be turned upside down to begin with and then you might turn
things right side up properly through the situations created by the guru you're able to see this
that seemed important to say
and then another thing that seemed important to say is how all these things come to this again
is his holiness "dugo kentze vermice" is a very popular like very widely spread quote now of his
holiness heart advice in four lines as long as "dugo kentze vermice" do not forget the lama
pray to him at all times do not let mind be distracted watch your mind essence do not forget
death persist in dharma do not forget sentient beings with compassion dedicate your merit to them
say it one more time do not forget the lama pray to him at all times do not let mind be distracted
watch your mind essence do not forget death persist in dharma
do not forget sentient beings with compassion dedicate your merit to them
then as a sweet way to conclude our own precious amazing vajra master
Venerable Kempo Samoan Dhoni Rinpoche wrote a spring poem
may we become more grateful for everything may we learn instant forgiveness may we never forget
precious friends may we become more skillful in actually causing the happiness of others
may we never lose sight of the holy dharma may sangha become one
thank you